Thank you very much and now
if you would please welcome
to the stage Dave Zarzycki.
Good afternoon.
Today, I'm going to talk to you about
porting Unix applications to Mac OS X.
One might say this is about porting,
learning about the unique differences
our platform provides if you're coming
from maybe a Linux or a Solaris box or
your favorite Unix platform of the day.
Now, I assume you actually,
since you're coming
from another platform,
have experience with Uniq.
So when I use certain terminology,
it won't be too foreign to you.
So what are we going to cover?
We're going to cover the
history of Unix a little bit,
just to show where Apple comes from.
We're going to talk about bundles,
a unique Apple invention
for packaging stuff,
and packaging itself for
software distribution.
We're also going to talk about
some interesting daemons on our
platform that you may notice
when doing a PS or wonder why,
you know, just when you're poking around.
We're going to talk about
standards conformance,
since that's a very important
thing to so many of you,
since you are using standards
APIs most of the time.
We're going to be
talking about the linker,
the runtime,
and other what we call frameworks.
It's the whole stack of
things you link against.
File system portability.
Our file systems that we have
on our platform are very wide,
and they support certain options,
and others don't support certain options.
We're also going to talk about
authorization and authentication.
Obviously, in a multi-user environment,
you need to be able to allow certain
users to do certain things and not allow
certain users to do certain other things.
Finally, there's the development
environment we provide,
Xcode.
And lastly,
we're going to talk about Mach.
topics we're not going to cover.
We're not going to talk about
drivers or writing or I/O Kit.
We're not going to talk
about the GUI in any way,
nor multimedia, printing, font handling,
basically anything you can see,
we're not going to talk about it.
It's just about the bottom
layers of the system.
Now, Apple's Mac OS X.
We've got a long legacy of
different OSs in the platform.
We have some of our roots from BSD,
the Berkeley Software Distribution
of Unix,
from way back in the day.
We have Mach out of Carnegie Mellon,
which was the microkernel work and
took large advances into virtual
memory and interprocess communication.
Finally, NeXT brought these two together
and tried to make a product
out of it called NeXTSTEP.
And they succeeded fairly
well in accomplishing the
goals they set out to do.
So much so that Apple bought
it and produced Mac OS X,
what you're using today.
And Mac OS X brings in its own
unique flavor of things to add to
the mix with our Mac OS 9 legacy,
with our Mac apps and our
legendary ease of use.
Now, let's start getting into some of
the details that make us unique.
First and foremost,
we have a notion called bundles.
You're going to see them
everywhere on the system.
A bundle is just a
user-visible atomic blob.
When you see an application,
you'll click, you drag it.
You can't, but behind the scenes,
it's actually a folder.
The folder contains, or directory,
whatever you want to call it.
It contains executables, resources,
pictures, sounds, you name it.
Anything needed to support it.
The application is in that bundle,
that one directory.
Now, in the Unix world,
you might stuff some of
these things in user share.
You might stick some of
the libraries in user lib.
They're all scattered
throughout the system.
We like bundles because it brings
them all together in one directory.
The users can move around
and add to their system and
delete at their discretion.
Finally,
we have two variants of the bundles,
given our history.
We have the traditional bundle.
We have the name of your application,
foo.app/foo.
That's how we'd identify it as a bundle.
Now, in the Mac OS X timeframe,
we invented the notion of a CFBundle,
which is the name of your bundle slash,
you know, the name of your application.
[Transcript missing]
Now, again, I'd want to drill down that
we're talking about the basic
system part of the system.
We're talking about that layer right
in there that you see around lib
system and the top part of the kernel,
meaning system calls, things like libc.
and some of the other various
libraries like libm and whatnot
that you're already familiar with.
The things that make us
unique on our platform is not
only do we have libraries,
we have these notions of frameworks.
Frameworks are really just libraries,
but they live in a bundle and they live
in a different location than user lib.
We'll talk about more later
where they live on the system.
Now,
if you want to get third-party software,
there is various options
available to you.
We have the Fink project.
I don't know if you've heard of it.
But if you're porting, let's say,
an existing open source project,
let's say you grab Screen and
you're trying to run it on 10,
well, someone may have already
done that work for you.
If you check with Fink or Darwin Ports,
you'll probably find that the
project you're trying to port is
already ported to the platform,
saving you lots of work.
Also, as far as packaging is concerned,
our own product, we have Mac OS X,
our client distribution,
and we have Mac OS X Server for
our server customers.
The server product is mostly value-add
based around our file server technology
and additional components to make the
server experience more pleasurable.
They are.
Not only based on our
GUI to control applications,
but things like additions to
the web server environment like
blogging software or whatnot.
Finally, we also have Darwin,
which is Apple's proof that we are
committed to open source by releasing
the foundation of the operating system
in a fully bootable fashion that you can
run on your Apple box should you desire.
Now, you're coming from a different Unix.
You do a PS and you see some
interesting daemons floating around.
I want to talk about at least a few of
them so you can understand some of them
that we have on our platform and why
we have them and why they're important.
Let's start with NotifyD.
NotifyD is a way that daemons
can send messages to each other
and not necessarily agree on the
technology used to send the message.
For example,
our networking team has put together
a daemon that actually controls
how interfaces come up or manage,
set up.
Well, some daemons want to find out
when the networking changes,
but they really don't need to know
the finer details of how or why.
So what happens is we send a
Mach message over to NotifyD saying
the network's changed.
And NotifyD then sends, let's say,
a signal over to one daemon.
Or they might send a message over
a file descriptor to another.
A lot of our daemons already
on the system actually use the
signal method to get restarted
when network change events occur.
They request that a HUP signal
gets sent to them and,
ta-da, anytime the network changes,
they get HUPed.
is the developer of
the new UI application.
He is responsible for configuring and
controlling various pieces of hardware,
but mostly centered around networking.
is the head of the
network policy department.
It's where our DHCP client lives.
It's where some of our other networking
policy decision making happens.
It's very critical of the system
and I would recommend that if
you want to learn more about it,
you can look at our system
configuration framework which are the
external APIs for talking to configd.
Also, if you look,
you might see something
called the MDNS responder.
That's also known as rendezvous.
This is what implements it.
Some things talk to it to
either browse the network or
to send out advertisements.
And that's its sole function in life.
Finally, Lookupd.
Lookupd is equivalent to NSCD if you're
coming from a Linux or Solaris box.
It's our name service caching daemon.
It caches DNS lookups,
it caches name lookups, group lookups,
anything you can pretty much
think of that's being looked up,
it caches them.
It also implements get at or info,
for example,
and does the advanced queries for that.
Now, let's talk about standards.
Standards.
Our policy, you know,
is that we like standards.
We want to comply to them,
but we're not making a serious effort
to go out and test all the standards.
But, but, but, but,
if you find a bug that is where
we do not conform to a standard,
please, please let us know.
We will try our best to fix it,
because we do believe that
standards are best for all involved,
us and you as a developer.
Now, for example,
we do know about some bugs that we
haven't gotten around to fixing,
and one that might affect you when
you're porting an application is that
we don't set error no in Mathlib.
It's unfortunate, but true,
and it's something you can't do.
you'll have to work around.
Now, let's talk about some other
interesting details we have.
We have a different linker than you
might find on a Solaris or Linux box.
We have MachO as our file format
and DYLD as our dynamic linker.
Linux box might use ELF as a file
format and LD.SO as its dynamic linker.
What does this mean?
Well, some behavioral differences.
For example, versioning.
On our platform,
what might be considered the major
number in the Linux or Solaris
world is the path on our system.
If you do an O tool dash
L against an executable,
you'll see the full path
to a library on the system.
If you want to do a binary
incompatible change,
change the name.
This is a big difference
because that means that if you
redirect through a symlink,
you'll get a performance hit,
unlike the Linux world,
which has an LD cache,
which caches the symlink translations.
Also, we have bundles versus libraries.
In the Linux and Solaris world,
there is no difference between
a plugin and a library.
It's just whether you link to it at
link time or you load it at run time.
It can be the same file.
On our platform, that's not true.
You have to specifically compile a plugin
as a plugin to load it in that manner.
Now, what does that mean?
You need to use the dash bundle flag.
Also,
if you want to make your life easier
as a developer of a plugin or a bundle,
depending on how you want to call it,
you can use the dash bundle loader flag.
What that does is specify the
actual executable which is
meant to load your plugin.
So that way it can resolve symbols
and make sure that your plugin
is fully resolved at link time
rather than just letting it slide.
Some symbols are undefined
and we hope that it works out.
runtime.
Also, a unique difference that we
have is the two-level namespace.
We invented this technology
to help us deal with binary
compatibility going forward.
What it means is that a library,
let's call it library foo,
might use malloc from our lib system.
Now, let's say you include a
malloc in your product,
in your application.
Well, only your code is actually
going to end up using it.
and the other two speakers will
be talking about the Malik symbol.
There is a direct reference from
that library to the Malik symbol.
It is in a global namespace.
You can, if you need the semantics
that if you define a Malik,
it will be overridden everywhere
in your address space,
you can say dash force underscore
flat underscore namespace.
This will tell the dynamic linker to
collapse things down and make sure
that symbols are the same everywhere.
Also, a very interesting thing about our
platform is that we're far more
dynamic when it comes to dynamic
symbol resolution at runtime.
What this means,
let's describe a classic bug,
is that Sendmail, for example,
had a signal handler.
The signal handler wasn't resolved
fully in the sense that the functions
it called hadn't been resolved yet.
Now, Sendmail's running along,
calls a function which triggers the
dynamic linker to start resolving it,
and then the signal fires.
Well, we're already in the dynamic
linker trying to resolve a signal,
and what happens is now the
signal handler's running,
and it reaches a symbol
that needs to be resolved,
and now we've got two instances where
we're trying to be in the dynamic linker
at the same time on the same thread.
And you deadlock.
This is a neat difference.
We're far more dynamic,
but it can be problems
if you're porting code.
What I recommend is you just do dash
bind underscore at underscore load,
and that'll tell the dynamic linker
to make sure that all your symbols
are resolved before you hit main.
Now,
when it comes to forward and backwards
compatibility on our platform,
we have something that
will make your life easier.
We have something called
Mac OS 9 weak symbols.
What it means is that
you can say if symbol,
call symbol.
So there might be a
function you want to use,
but it's not available
on a previous release.
That's okay.
Just test for it.
And if it's there, you can use it.
And if it's not, you can't.
It's a very powerful tool
for dealing with forwards
and backwards compatibility.
So, the first thing we're going to
talk about is static linking.
Static linking is a very common
problem in the Mac OS X platform.
Static linking of standard
libraries is impossible.
We don't ship them.
Sorry.
It's just something that we
find is best for our needs,
is supporting you, and, yeah,
it's best for all involved, we believe.
Now, I'm not done talking
about the linker yet.
There are some other interesting
behaviors that are worth talking about.
Symbols in an object file
must be overridden together.
In the Elf, Linux, Solaris world,
you can, for example,
override malloc and not override free.
Now,
that's okay if you never called free,
but if you actually do call free,
you're going to get a
different implementation.
Their backing stores might
not even be the same.
One can imagine that horrible problems
will start to ensue when you do that.
Well, on our platform,
the way we solve that is we put
malloc and free and realloc and
the other associated functions
all in the same .c file,
which get compiled down
to the same .o file,
obviously.
And the rule that our dynamic
linker enforces is that if you
override one symbol in a .o file,
you can't use any of the others there.
You have to override them, too.
Now, that might not affect you.
You might not be overriding
symbols all that much,
but it can potentially affect
you if you put unrelated pieces
of code in the same .o file.
It's something to watch out for.
Also, on our platform,
common symbols are problematic.
I just recommend that
you do -f no common.
Try and make sure that you're
just not using common symbols.
They're just a bad
idea in general anyway.
has a couple more things to talk about.
Bundle unloading is
currently unimplemented.
Sorry, you can't unload a plug-in,
basically.
It will still reside
in your address space.
Another interesting issue to be aware of
is that if you're using C++ in a bundle,
our static initializers are
not being called at the moment.
Again, it's an issue to worry
about when porting code.
Now, if we can move outside of an
actual address space and just
talk about general runtime issues,
we store configuration and
resource files not necessarily
in the same place on Mac OS X.
We store them in some
different locations.
We have Open Directory,
which is our great multiplexing,
demultiplexing engine for getting
preferences from different places.
And we'd recommend that you use those
APIs if you want to be a good citizen
on our platform to find out about your
various configuration parameters or
general system configuration parameters.
Also, instead of having a lot of dot
files in your home directory
using different parsers and
just different altogether code,
we have CodeForce.
We have a lot of other things
that we can do for you that
can make your life easier.
It's called the CF or
NS Preferences APIs,
and they put them in tilde
slash library slash preferences,
and it'll save you a lot of work of
dealing with how to save preferences
and restore them on our platform.
Now, when it comes to system startup,
we have some differences compared to
a Linux or FreeBSD or Solara system.
On those kinds of platforms,
everything essentially
calls out from etcrc,
and you'll just have shell
scripts calling shell scripts
calling shell scripts.
And what will happen is that when it
comes to what order to run things in,
the Unix world is pretty static still.
All they do really to accomplish
proper initialization is just
make sure the shell startup
scripts are named in serial order.
So you might have one foo, two bar,
three baz.
Eh, that's, you know,
pretty not very dynamic.
And we've done some
things to improve that.
We created startup items.
Again, they're bundles.
We've talked about these before.
They're stored in the system
library startup items.
Each one of those bundles
contains a little blob of
data specifying dependencies.
This means we can dynamically start
up the system and boot things.
When they're ready.
In fact, we even boot some startup items
up in parallel since they don't
have dependencies on each other.
is going to be talking
about booting up the system.
The boot up is changing.
Unfortunately, the session that talked
about that was yesterday,
session 106.
It's being replaced by
something called LaunchD.
One can think of it as
I Net D on steroids.
It's going to be able to support any
daemon on the system and make sure that
it gets launched on demand when any
configuration detail of it changes.
Some more runtime issues.
In fact, I just talked about pre-binding
with one of the Xcode people
right before this session.
So a lot of this slide
doesn't really matter anymore.
Pre-binding,
but for the purpose of this session,
I'll still talk about it.
Pre-binding.
It was a method we have
to increase performance of
runtime of your application.
What we did is, since we know of all the
libraries on the system,
we can pre-calculate where they
will load in your address space.
Once we do that,
we know where all the symbols are,
and we can then record in your
executable the linking information.
Let's say, again, use malloc.
Well, we know that's going to
be 9 kabillion something,
and we can record that
in your executable.
That way, when we load,
we check that the state of
the world hasn't changed,
and if it hasn't,
we just let your application go
because we've already pre-linked you.
percent.
Unfortunately,
what this means is we've modified
executables and libraries all the time.
Whenever a library changes,
we go modify everything
and reprebind everything.
That's a problem for some people.
It means that backup and security
tools get false positive for changes.
Things like tripwire to do intrusion
detection don't work because,
again,
they're false positives for changes.
How is this all changing?
Well, we've written a much, much,
much faster dynamic linker in Tiger,
so much so that we believe that
you as developers no longer
need to worry about pre-binding.
I'm hoping that will
make a lot of you happy.
Now, this is more of an issue if you're
thinking of a 10.0 or 10.1 box,
but our bin SH changed.
It used to be Zish.
Zish was almost POSIX compliant,
but not quite.
We switched to Bash.
We think Bash at the time
happened to be faster,
too, which was a nice perk,
but that's not true anymore.
But Bash is POSIX compliant,
and we like that.
But if you were using some Zish-isms,
you might need to accommodate the change.
If you're obviously writing
a portable shell script,
hopefully none of this
should matter to you.
Frameworks.
Frameworks is something
I touched on earlier.
It's a bundle-based alternative to the
hierarchy of libraries and resources.
It contains the library and
headers but it could contain
other shared resources too.
Let's say your library is a GUI library
and it has pictures and sound.
It can be in your framework.
When it comes to actual compilation,
though, there is a difference.
You don't say -l foo to
link against the framework.
You say -framework foo.
That tells the compiler to look
in a different location for it.
On the topic of file system portability,
POSIX file systems are typically case
sensitive and they support sparse files,
although that's not
necessarily universal.
Our native default
application that we have,
default file system for Mac OS X is
HFS+. It's case insensitive,
case preserving.
That means that you can
have big foo or little foo,
but you can't have both at the same time.
We also support resource forks and
the API for changing the file system.
We have a lot of tools that
are not in the same format,
used to be out of the way and Unix
applications wouldn't know about it,
which created issues for backup tools or
anybody copying files using Unix tools.
This has changed in the Tiger timeframe
because resources are now going to expose
as extended attributes and any Unix tool
that is aware of extended attributes
can deal with resource forks correctly.
But it is something to be aware
of considering that extended
attributes are now coming into
Finally, hard links are not supported
by all file systems.
It's something that your
application might need or use,
but you need to be aware that while
supported by HFS+, some of the
other file systems we have on the
system don't necessarily support it,
like the WebDAV file system.
Now, something that is, again,
unique to our platform when
it comes to the file system
hierarchy is the way we do scoping.
We have four primary
scopes on the system.
We have the system scope,
essentially software that's
shipped by us that you shouldn't
ever need to touch or manage.
We have the network scope.
It's where a network administrator
might put anything they want
to show up on all machines.
We have the local scope,
anything on the local machine.
And finally, the user scope,
something in the user's home directory.
How does this affect anything?
Well, you remember how we
talked about frameworks?
They can live in all
four of these scopes.
You have system library frameworks.
We have library frameworks,
which is the local case.
We have network library
frameworks for the network case.
And you can, as far as I know,
put frameworks even in
the user's home directory,
should you desire.
Again,
tilde slash library slash frameworks.
When you're developing, let's say,
a framework or really any
application that wants to
put files on our file system,
we would recommend that you try
and conform to our file system
hierarchy for where to place files.
On the topic of authentication
and authorization,
we have the security framework.
It's our preferred API for doing things.
It has a lot of support for advanced
technologies like smart cards and
other interesting authentication
mechanisms like fingerprint readers,
you name it.
They're trying to support a
lot of the advanced things
that many organizations want.
It's also a capability
and rights-based system.
I won't go into the details of that,
but it is important to keep
in mind if you need to do
authentication and authorization.
And finally,
while we do have the security framework,
we do have PAM available if you
need a compatibility solution.
Either you have a PAM plugin
or you're using the PAM APIs.
We make sure that the authentication
and authorization can route correctly if
you need any kind of PAM compatibility.
Our development environment is a
lot of familiar things and some
different stuff at the same time.
It's mostly a GNU toolchain.
It's GCC and GDB and Make,
things you're familiar with.
But we do have some differences
that are good to be aware of.
For example, we have the C preprocessor.
We've modified it to
support precompiled headers.
You might see these in user include
when you maybe say an ls star dot p.
You'll see some
precompiled headers there.
It helps us when compiling large
applications that are including
lots and lots of headers,
so we don't have to regenerate
all the C preprocessor paths.
Unfortunately, the C preprocessor doesn't
support all of the GNU extensions
to their C preprocessor,
which some of you might have consciously
or subconsciously started using.
How do you work around this?
Well, it's dash no dash cpp dash precomp.
That'll get you your old GNU linker back.
Now, Xcode, obviously.
There's been many,
many sessions about it this week.
We highly recommend that you use it.
In the case of debugging,
it has a very powerful visual
debugger that we would highly
recommend that you use.
And you don't necessarily need to
go to a lot of effort to port your
application's build system into Xcode.
Xcode supports legacy targets.
You can just say, look,
there's a makefile over there.
Just go build against it.
And you can keep your
legacy build system,
which is probably desirable.
It's not desirable to you if you
still want to maintain portability.
But you can take full advantage of
everything that Xcode has to offer
with code searching and debugging
and lots of yummy things like that.
Finally, some of you have some very,
very, very big apps out there.
So much so that you run into a nice,
interesting architectural
anomaly on our platform.
It just requires some
different code generation.
If you need more than
16 megabytes of text,
you need to use dash M long call on
the compilation line to make sure that
your code gets generated correctly.
Otherwise, it will fail to link.
Again, it's just something to be aware
of if you have a large executable.
If we talk about APIs now,
we're not completely
like other platforms.
We have some things you
need to be aware of.
If you're using Poll,
it happens to be emulated on
our platform and we highly
recommend you use KQ instead.
If you can't, though,
at least it's still there.
But at the moment,
it's emulated via select.
So if you're familiar
with those two APIs,
you might be able to imagine the
scaling problems we have with
that current emulation technique.
But if you don't need a large
number of file descriptors,
it's okay to use our poll
emulation at the moment.
Also, DL Open for loading plugins, again,
it's emulated.
Does this affect you?
Well, again, as we talked about,
unloading plugins is not supported.
And if you're taking advantage of the
RTLD Next functionality of DL Open,
we don't support that at the moment.
That's something to be aware of.
Other issues we have that you
should be aware of is that
Pthreads is partially implemented.
It gets better and
better with each release,
but you need to be careful when
you look for functionality.
The biggest thing to be aware of
with Pthreads is we don't necessarily
support inter-process sharing of locks,
for example.
Something to be aware of.
Also, POSIX message queues are missing.
If you really,
really need that kind of functionality,
our current story is that we recommend
that you use maybe Mach ports.
But we hope that you can
find a different API.
Also,
when it comes to System 5 shared memory,
we support it,
but it's very weak at the moment.
If you look in our boot up in /etc/rc,
you'll see that we statically
set the variables for that.
And once those System 5 shared
memory variables are set,
they can't change for
the life of the boot.
So if you need those changed,
you need to be aware of that.
Finally, well, not finally,
while we do have OpenSSL on the platform,
we would recommend that you use CDSA.
OpenSSL has some architectural
limitations when it deals with,
for example, smart cards.
OpenSSL will hand the
key around directly,
whereas CDSA supports having the
key being represented as a handle,
which could be connected up to a
smart card somewhere else where
you don't actually even have
a physical access to the key.
A unique language on our platform,
a language opportunity, is Objective-C.
Some of our frameworks
are implemented in it,
and you might need to use it.
I actually recommend it.
It's kind of fun to use.
It looks like small talk,
and it'll probably only take
you less than a day to learn,
so I wouldn't be scared of it.
And you might enjoy it.
Finally, LibTool versus GNU LibTool.
It's unfortunate,
but these things happen.
We have a name conflict.
If you run LibTool on our platform,
you'll get a tool that we wrote many,
many,
many years ago at Next called LibTool
for dealing with library generation.
Has nothing to do with the GNU LibTool.
They're not even really
functionally overlapping,
but it's just a conflict in names.
And that means on our platform,
you need to call,
if you need to use GNU LibTool,
you call it glib tool.
Now the last thing we're going
to talk about today is Mach.
Our story is if you need to.
We don't want you using
Mach if you don't need to.
Mach has APIs, for example,
for allocating memory
in your address space.
VM allocate and VM deallocate.
We'd rather you not have used those APIs.
We have perfectly fine
POSIX APIs for doing that.
It's MMAP, for example.
But sometimes you do need to use it.
If you need advanced control
of your process priority,
that's the currently best
mechanism for doing that.
Also, if your process ends up using
libraries that use Mach,
you need to be aware of
the bootstrap namespaces.
It's a mockism.
I really don't want to
go into it at the moment.
What it means is that different
processes in your login session have
a different context mock-wise than,
let's say, a system daemon.
So if you need to talk to another daemon,
this might cause problems for you.
Finally,
when it comes to traditional Unix
APIs that are non-standardized,
ptrace is only partially
implemented on our platform.
We only implement it
enough to do an attach.
After that, GDB on our platform,
for example,
uses the Mach APIs for getting
and setting and controlling
the process it's introspecting.
I doubt very many of
you are using ptrace,
so that probably isn't something
you need to worry about.
Who do you want to talk to after this
session is over and after you leave WWDC?
You want to contact Jason Yao,
our Track Manager.
He should hopefully be able to direct
your inquiries to the right people
around Apple if you have any questions.
Also, we do have some documentation
offline if you need it.
There's our porting Unix slash
Linux applications to Mac OS X.
There's the, this tells you where it is.
We also have the porting drivers
to Mac OS X if you're coming
from a different platform.
And again, this is the locations
for those pieces of data.